January 2025,
>> [music]
>> Deep Seek.
>> Ladies and gentlemen, too often I hear
that Europe [music] is late to the AI
race.
>> The Chinese model Deep Seek was
apparently developed at a fraction of
the cost of the leading American models.
But it performed about as well.
Its weights were open source. Anyone
could run it on their own
infrastructure, free from American tech
dependence.
It hit number one in the app store
within a week.
Ever since ChatGPT, Europeans have been
asking whether they could still catch up
to the Americans in [music] AI.
>> say we will repeat the main mistakes of
the past
and another generation of European
talents will be forced to leave.
>> But Deep Seek is evidence that cutting
edge AI can be trained without the
resources of the US tech giants.
A Sputnik moment where American
superiority could be questioned.
>> [music]
>> The latest R1 model is as sophisticated
as that of Anthropic's latest model or
of OpenAI's latest model, but they've
done it at a fraction of the cost.
>> Pundits declare it's Europe's moment to
enter the race.
>> We will [music] spare no effort to make
Europe an AI continent.
>> But there are voices of caution.
>> said, I think a lot of the claims are
exaggerated and a little bit misleading.
>> Deep Seek has smart researchers, and
move fast on the new reasoning paradigm.
Efficiency gains only go so far.
>> What do you think?
>> American export restrictions on AI chips
[music] will soon constrain its rise.
Silicon Valley is largely unfazed.
The hyperscalers double down on building
data centers.
But in Europe,
>> I welcome the European AI Champions
Initiative. We aim to mobilize a total
of 200 billion euros for AI investment
in Europe.
>> [music]
>> Deep Seek leveling the playing field
gives the illusion that they can take a
bet and keep up.
>> It's a European AI strategy.
>> And it will be a very important
occasion.
But this strategy will be a unique
opportunity for Europe
to accelerate.
>> They were wrong.
On the 12th [music] of June, 2026, the
US federal government told Anthropic to
block every foreign national from using
its most powerful models.
>> [music]
>> With the flick of a switch, an entire
continent was pulled away from the
leading frontier.
A scenario had predicted [music] this.
It just didn't expect it until 2029.
This is a story about Europe in 2031. A
scenario about what it means for Europe
to lose on AI.
It was written by a group of researchers
who have spent their careers where
frontier AI meets European policy.
It's modeled on an American forecast
called AI 2027, a future of radical AI
takeoff, but what that takeoff means for
Europe [music] and its institutions.
And the future it imagines doesn't look
too hot.
Some of this won't play out. Some of the
claims will make you angry. Some you'll
find ridiculous.
But that's important. Talking about what
that future might look like, no matter
how much you disagree [music] with these
projections in particular, are in my
view a step in the right direction.
That's why I'm making this video. I want
to tell a story about what Europe might
look like in 2031.
February 2025, plug, baby, plug.
>> on nuclear energy
which means that more than 75% of our
electricity
is produced by this nuclear energy.
>> It's 3 weeks after Deep Six R1, Macron
hosts the AI action summit in Paris.
In 2025, the geopolitical environment
has [music] hardened.
>> It's very important in this world where
I have a good friend in the other part
of the ocean saying, "Drill, baby,
drill."
Here, there is no need to drill.
It's just plug, baby, plug.
>> Europe is now focused on
competitiveness, not safety. Catch up is
possible. Europe signals a clear intent
to lead in AI. The continent may have
been off to a slow start, but it's now
waking up. European Commission President
Ursula von der Leyen announces a 200
billion euro Invest AI fund, including a
20 billion euro AI gigafactories
initiative to build five giant compute
clusters on European soil.
>> AI gigafactories
very large data and computing
infrastructure
for very large models. [music]
>> The British infrastructure provider
FluidStack announces an even bigger 1 GW
data center near Paris.
Mistral [music] is hailed as Europe's AI
champion, but the energy is short-lived.
Vice President J.D. Vance gives a
historic anti-Europe speech in one of
the summit's final sessions.
>> US innovators [music] of all sizes
already know what it's like to deal with
onerous international rules.
>> Later, he doubles down at the Munich
Security Conference.
>> It's [music and singing] not China, it's
not any other external actor.
And what I worry about is the threat
from within. The retreat of Europe from
some of its most fundamental values
>> EU policymakers working on AI worry.
Europe must de-risk from the US and
build its own AI. Sovereignty, whatever
that means, is the goal.
But things would have been much simpler
if they'd all just switched to Odoo.
Odoo is a European company that makes an
all-in-one business software with more
than 45 integrated apps.
It brings every app your organization
could possibly need into a single
platform, [music]
like CRM, sales, invoicing, accounting,
project management, inventory, website
building, HR. Because they're all
integrated, your sales, for example,
link straight to your accounting and
your inventory. This means it adapts and
builds as your organization grows, and
it can adjust itself to your country
automatically with taxes, currencies,
local regulations all handled.
Whenever you start a business, there's a
lot of regrets to have.
But for me, one of the biggest is not
grounding all the administration in one
single source of truth.
Odoo is great at that. The first app is
free for life with unlimited hosting and
support included.
And if you want the full suite, it
starts at 1990 euro a month. Link in the
description.
August 2025, is AI hitting a wall?
In the US, the AI fixation only
intensifies.
Reasoning models like OpenAI's O3 are
the new rage. The talent race is in full
speed.
Meta poaches researchers for football
star salaries. Engineers sleep in tents
at the office.
The Trump administration publishes its
AI action plan, calling for American AI
dominance.
But in Europe, people roll their eyes.
Americans are Americans. Large claims by
boisterous tech CEOs doesn't help the
illusion that this is being made bigger
than it actually is.
Some are calling AI a bubble or saying
the tech is fake.
The narrative hardens when ChatGPT 5
arrives in August. Despite the hype,
when it lands, the reaction is
disappointment. GPT 5 still
hallucinates, it makes silly mistakes,
its agentic capabilities are limited.
AI skeptics take victory laps.
But other experts are doubtful. O3 is
only months old.
GPT 5 raised the capability floor rather
than the ceiling.
More powerful models are accessible to
free users.
But in Europe, they are talking to deaf
ears.
Even in America, some investors are
getting cold feet.
But the money keeps going.
>> that an IPO we're all worrying about on
the private market.
>> OpenAI raises $40 billion.
>> committed to OpenAI at this time.
>> Yes, there are still a lot of craziness
happening on the private markets when it
comes to AI. Still a lot of optimism.
>> Nvidia signs a letter of intent to
invest $100 billion in OpenAI.
Oracle and OpenAI strike a $300 billion
compute deal.
In Europe, these circular-looking
arrangements draw comparisons to past
financial crises.
In September, Mistral raises 1.7 billion
euros.
1.3 billion euros from the Dutch
semiconductor giant ASML.
The round is 20 times smaller than
OpenAI's, but amid the bubble talk, few
Europeans worry that Mistral is raising
too little.
Meanwhile, the Gigafactories initiative
is slowly grinding.
Amendments show that industry will have
to fund more than 2/3 of Under Lion's 20
billion euros.
Media outlets claim the 200 billion euro
InvestAI initiative was largely recycled
public funds, repackaged with hopes of
massive private industry AI investment.
But the urgency of early 2025 has faded.
If AI's overhyped anyway, there is no
need to worry.
November 2025, two [music] worlds.
By November 2025, Anthropic releases
Claude 4.5 Opus. AI agents have actually
started to work.
Instead of computer use agents and
assistants, the frontier labs have
doubled down on agents that excel at
coding.
The market is lucrative, and proficiency
in software engineering also helps the
lab speed up their own research and
development.
Claude Code goes viral.
People learn that it can do much more
than code. Through bash commands and
HTML, coding agents can also send
emails, organize documents, and navigate
the web.
Developers burn through thousands of
dollars in tokens a month, refusing to
go to bed without first queuing up
overnight tasks for multiple agents to
coordinate on as they sleep. Anthropic's
revenue skyrockets from $1 billion
annual recurring revenue in December
2024 to $9 billion at year's end.
Become one of the fastest growing
companies in history.
Meanwhile, Anthropic is already training
Opus 4.6.
Release cycles have compressed from 6
months to 3.
Top researchers show that most of their
code is now written by agents like
Claude Code, and companies start
monitoring their AI deployments with
other AI systems.
European leaders are only partially
aware.
They lack trusted tech advisors, and
institutional policies often forbid the
use of standalone AI tools like Claude
or ChatGPT.
March 2026, the Frontier AI initiative.
In Europe, sovereignty talk is abound
with little to show.
Back in November, Germany and France
announced the Frontier AI initiative.
With backing from the European
Commission, it's a plan to establish by
Q1 2026 the world's best-funded
nonprofit AI research organization.
>> [music]
>> But when Q1 ends, the only concrete
thing the Frontier AI initiative has
produced for the public is [music] an
expert forum.
The promised research organization is
delayed. The details need further
fleshing out.
The experts that Germany, France, and
the Commission consult all point in
wildly different directions.
Some confidently claim that LLMs are a
dead end and that the initiative should
try to leapfrog the Americans [music]
through a different paradigm.
Others argue that Europe should find its
own niche, reliable AI, AI for science,
industrial foundation models. The list
is long and consensus is nowhere to be
found.
Resources are scarce, too.
France has little fiscal
maneuverability, and the Commission's
new budget only starts in 2028.
Germany has money, but a long wish list
in other domains, and it's just
committed to building the largest
conventional army in Europe.
It's a tough spot. Partners already
committed. Something needs to be built,
>> [music]
>> but spinning up a public Frontier AI lab
turns out to be difficult.
The initiative wants to attract
world-class talent, but it cannot offer
anywhere near the compute and
compensation packages of the American
labs.
Without proof that they [music] can hire
top-notch talent, none of the partners
want to throw serious money at it.
Meanwhile, in Silicon Valley, OpenAI
raises $122 billion, putting to bed any
remaining worries that the company can't
pay its bills this year.
April 2026, Claude Mythos.
In April 2026, Anthropic announces
Claude Mythos, the most capable model
ever built.
For the first time, the company does not
release its new model publicly.
Mythos has become so proficient at
coding and security research that it has
autonomously identified thousands of
zero-day vulnerabilities across every
major operating system and browser. Many
are one to two decades old, sitting
undetected in codebases reviewed by
millions of developers.
Anthropic determines it's not safe to
release. Without many people noticing,
Anthropic has supposedly become one of
the most competent offensive cyber
organizations on the planet. Spooked by
their own pace, they launch project
Glass Wing, a defensive coalition with
AWS, Apple, Google, Microsoft, Nvidia,
and CrowdStrike.
Giving partners exclusive access to
Mythos to find and patch vulnerabilities
before adversaries can exploit them. The
goal is to harden the world's critical
software before open-source models reach
the same offensive capabilities.
The announcement lands in the middle of
a bitter standoff between Anthropic and
the US government.
When Anthropic announces it wants to
expand Mythos access to 70 additional
[music] organizations, the White House
objects. "It's not secure," they say.
Besides, Anthropic's compute is finite.
More partners means less capacity for US
government workloads.
A month earlier, the administration had
wanted nothing to do with Anthropic's
AI.
>> All government agencies [music] to cut
off ties with the AI company Anthropic
after it refused to agree to the
Pentagon's demands.
>> Now, it wants the company's most
powerful model [music] kept largely for
itself.
For Europe, the implication is deeply
uncomfortable.
The most consequential defensive
cybersecurity tool in the world is being
rationed by a US administration
that has just spent a month trying to
break [music] the company that built it.
Most European governments and businesses
are not on the access list.
May 2026, disillusionment.
After 18 months, DeepSeek has finally
released its next model, but it barely
registers. It's impressive given the
company's size, but still six months
behind the frontier. DeepSeek admits it
lacks the compute to serve it widely,
likely because of US export controls.
The playing field has not leveled.
Mistral has raised another 850 million
euros, around 150 times smaller than
OpenAI's last.
Looking for capital, it has [music]
turned to the US.
Infrastructure tells a similarly grim
story.
Fluid stack will no longer build its
promised 1 GW data center in France,
pivoting to American build-outs after
relocating its headquarters to the US.
EU gigafactory applications have only
just opened a year after the
announcement and budget constraints mean
the EU can likely fund only two of the
five planned facilities
not realistically up and running before
2029.
By May 2026, the largest AI
supercomputer in the US runs at 1.5 GW.
Europe's largest sits at 75 MW, 20 times
smaller.
Even a gigafactory appearing overnight
would be more than 10 times smaller than
America's leading facility.
By now, national security staff have
briefed European leaders on Mythos.
In return, they've asked uncomfortable
questions.
Why don't European companies and
governments have access?
Do we have domestic fallback options?
Wasn't AI supposed to hit the wall?
But while leaders and CEOs are looped
in, the Mythos breakthrough is not
reaching the masses.
Cybersecurity is not sexy and there's no
product to try.
Some people deny Anthropic's claims
entirely. The gap between public
perception and actual capabilities have
never been higher.
But things will change.
Up to this point, all the events can be
verified by historical records.
We'll no longer single out individual AI
companies.
Prometheus stands for the leading
American AI company, Lumos for the
leading European company, and Phoenix
for the leading Chinese one.
In February, German Chancellor Friedrich
Merz had flown to Guangzhou and toured
Chinese EV and robotics factories. He
returned chastened, convinced that
German industry would not survive on
inherited prestige. In August 2026, he
makes a similar trip to San Francisco.
He wants to witness the AI revolution
from up close. He meets researchers,
tours labs, and is shown under NDA
capabilities that do not yet have names.
When he returns to Berlin, an insider
reports that Merz has been in an
unusually brooding philosophical mood.
Merz has come to believe that European
elites have catastrophically misread the
past 18 months.
While Brussels debated whether AI would
hit a wall, it had punched through
several.
While ministers weighed AI strategic's
importance in white papers, it quietly
swallowed software engineering and
cybersecurity.
While European capitals celebrated their
sovereign AI initiatives, dependence on
American providers only deepened.
Across the border in France, President
Macron has just been briefed on worrying
news. Lumos is preparing to stop
pre-training its own frontier AI models.
The feedback loops between data,
capital, and talent have hardened.
The compute gap has become a chasm. A
pivot looks rational.
The thought deeply disturbs Macron. The
French startup has often been called
Europe's last hope in AI.
Over the following days,
he and Merz hold a series of long
encrypted calls. Both feel they have
reached an inflection point. AI will
keep getting more capable. It will
rearrange labor markets, security
architectures, and the balance of power
between continents. Europe is dependent
and unprepared. Both men in private are
drawn to drastic measures. Interventions
actually proportionate to the moment.
Both know what that would cost them
politically.
Their political advisers plead for
restraint.
Their technical advisers plead for the
opposite.
They are scheduled one week out to
deliver a joint address at the
Franco-German Digital Sovereignty Summit
in Strasbourg. By the night before, they
still have not decided.
In the morning, Merz and Macron will
walk on stage together.
August 2026, a positive vision.
The speech Merz and Macron deliver is
the one their political advisers wrote.
It draws a natural conclusion.
If the United States can no longer be
trusted, Europe must build [music] its
own frontier AI. Merz speaks of resolve.
Macron speaks of destiny. Neither
mentions what they talked about in
private.
Over the following weeks, France,
Germany, and the European Commission
announce a cascade of interventions.
The media strategies volume overwhelm
the Eurosceptics with motion.
The messaging is hope. Imagine a world
where we run our own European, more
trustworthy models.
Billions of additional euros are
committed to the frontier AI initiative,
subsidized compute and AI in science.
Several American AI companies are
charged under the AI Act and the Digital
Services Act. The measure that actually
makes the headlines is a new EU I
commitment. By 2035, member states must
be 100% digitally sovereign. With civil
services no longer relying on American
AI companies or cloud providers. [music]
It also convinces Lumos to keep
investing in pre-training. With a
guaranteed pool of future customers,
investors line up again.
Most measures are well received. They
show resolve. They align with the
popular instinct to de-risk from the US.
But some experts are doubtful.
The investments are too little, too
late.
The adoption measures fail to address
deeper bottlenecks, the fragmented
single market, strict labor protections
that need to be paired with
astronomically high salaries for talent,
sector-specific rules that effectively
ban AI across much of health care and
legal services. But most European elites
are done with that kind of negativity.
Europe needs a positive vision. In
private, Marisa and Macron tell each
other that they did what was possible.
March 2028, taking stock.
More than 18 months have passed in
Strasbourg. AI progress has been
relentless. Agents now reliably operate
spreadsheets, enterprise software,
design tools, and procurement systems.
The leading labs have doubled down on
automating AI R&D itself, racing to be
the first to build a fully automated AI
researcher. [music]
Prometheus has gone public. Its market
cap surging to 5 trillion euros.
Nobody is calling AI overhyped anymore.
Through a heroic effort, Lumos has held
its position roughly 12 months behind
the frontier.
Raising billions from new investors,
keeping its talent from moving to the
US.
But its relative position hides that the
absolute distance and capabilities has
grown.
This is no longer an abstract problem.
Until recently, a few holdout Chinese AI
companies still open-source their
models. As a result, cyber capabilities
meaningfully beyond Mythos are now
widely available, including to anyone
who wants to misuse them.
Without active AI-assisted defense, such
systems breach most software.
People are furious at the labs. They
unleashed the disease and now sell the
cure.
Prometheus' AI is noticeably better at
cyber defense than Lumos's.
Some governments are only allowed to use
Lumos and are now regularly hit by
ransomware attacks built on better
models.
April 2028, cautious optimism.
And yet, politicians are hopeful. Europe
got lucky on cyber. The CCP has banned
Phoenix and its peers from openly
releasing systems that meaningfully
advance offensive capability. The
worst-case scenario may have been
averted by Beijing rather than Brussels.
Europe's adoption pilots, after a rocky
start, are returning positive results.
Doctors are becoming more productive
with AI. Teachers are giving more
personalized guidance to students.
The 2028 EU budget has unlocked
substantial funding for AI in science,
with heavy investment in medicine,
material science, and clean energy.
Areas where Europe could still possibly
win.
The job doomsayers, meanwhile, have not
been proven right, yet.
Even in sectors of high adoption,
>> [music]
>> AI is not behaving like a
labor-destroying technology, quite the
opposite.
Workers who know how to use it have
become markedly more valuable.
Consultants, software engineers,
lawyers, analysts, and designers who can
orchestrate AI systems see their output
and wages rise sharply.
The first macroeconomic effect of AI is
not mass unemployment, but a
productivity boom.
The public, however, is less convinced.
Polls across the EU show majorities
expecting AI to disrupt their work,
their children's prospects, and the
information environment more than it
approves any of them. Protests against
AI have begun to sprung up in European
city centers.
May 2028, the compute crunch. By May
2028, the whole world is screaming for
more AI compute. Every previous
bottleneck in the chip supply chain
found a creative workaround.
>> [music]
>> Now, for the first time, a bottleneck is
emerging with no obvious solution.
ASML, the Dutch semiconductor giant, is
the only company that can manufacture
the EUV machines TSMC uses to fab AI
chips.
Output has risen from 60 to 85 machines
a year, a real improvement, but wholly
insufficient against demand growing
three times annually.
The US government does not like that the
company constraining its AI ambitions
sit outside its control.
It also does not like that ASML still
exports older DUV machines to China,
where they are used to fab the country's
AI chips.
US-China tensions have risen sharply as
the AI race has heated up.
Washington worries China can outbuild it
once it fully indigenizes its
semiconductor ecosystem.
It is already better at manufacturing
and robotics, and its energy supply
skyrocketing. Beijing in turn worries
the US will use its AI advantage to
force geopolitical [music] concessions.
Now, Washington pressures the
Netherlands to halt all DUV exports.
This is highly escalatory. [music]
The machines do not only make Chinese AI
chips, but also chips for smartphones,
cars, and laptops [music] sold
worldwide.
The Dutch resist. They can see the
reasoning, but do not like being bossed
around, let alone dragged into a global
power [music] conflict.
The commission backs them, but many
member states fear American retaliation.
[music]
Seeing fragmented European support, the
Dutch turn to Japan and South Korea,
only to find the US has gone to them
first.
When Washington threatens to cut off
Cymer, the US-based laser supplier ASML
cannot operate without, the Netherlands
caves. [music]
August 2028, bottlenecks.
A new line of AI systems has arrived
that no longer thinks in English.
Instead of writing thoughts on a digital
scratchpad, it cycles through
high-dimensional vectors, long list of
numbers humans cannot interpret.
People in the know are alarmed. In
Brussels, experts urge the AI office to
act, but the commission is understaffed.
To most observers, the big news is
capability. Freed from compressing
complex thoughts into English, the
systems think more quickly and more
deeply.
In a matter of months, this produces a
significant jump in intelligence.
Models that cannot reliably complete
multi-day projects now [music] can.
In the US, employers on the fence about
cutting jobs pull the trigger.
Entry-level vacancies dry up.
Unemployment remains low in absolute
terms, but is rising sharply.
In Europe, the picture is grim in its
own way. The same job pressures are
building, but without accompanying
growth to absorb them. US GDP grew at an
annualized 4.7% last quarter. EU posted
2.9.
The productivity gap is commonly
attributed to differences in AI
diffusion. On the surface, adoption
rates look similar. Dig deeper and the
picture is more worrying.
Markets restructure around AI
significantly slower in Europe. America
produces more disruptive startups, and
its companies adopt AI faster because
the environment rewards it. Less
regulatory friction, a larger internal
market, more capital, weaker labor
protections, and a management culture
more comfortable with radical
automation.
Europe has access to the same models,
but it cannot extract the same economic
gains.
The dynamic plays out vividly in
Europe's labor market, where pretend
work has become common.
Strong labor protections means that
employers cannot let go of staff whose
jobs the AI systems can automate.
Employees log in, attend the meetings,
send the emails, and let their AI tools
do most of the actual output in a
fraction of the time.
The arrangement has its charms.
People enjoy the extra hours with their
families, the long lunches, the
afternoon walks. But the costs compound.
Salaries are paid for output that no
longer requires them. Firms carry head
counts they cannot justify.
Government spending [music] will need to
rise to cushion the labor disruption
when unemployment inevitably catches up
to reality.
But the same transition is eroding the
tax base.
European firms are losing share to
American AI first ones.
And a larger share of GDP is flowing to
capital, taxed at lower rates and often
routed through tax havens.
Meanwhile, global interest rates are
rising amid the capital-hungry AI boom.
In countries like France with state debt
at 120% of GDP, an ever larger share of
the government revenue is being spent
just to service it. The only real remedy
is growth, but Europe is not growing
nearly as fast as the US.
November 2028, the people don't want AI.
The world holds its breath as the 2028
US election reaches its conclusion.
AI has been a defining issue of the
campaign.
During the primaries, populist factions
on both sides ran on strong anti-AI
platforms. Data center moratoriums,
worker protection against AI automation,
bans on AI in education.
The general election offered more
centrist candidates with stronger ties
to the AI industry, but the underlying
sentiment has not gone away.
Increasingly, people take to the
streets.
Fractures show along two lines, the
classic Democrat versus Republicans, but
now also elites who typically welcome AI
versus a middle class that finds it
scary, amoral, and dehumanizing.
Increasingly, anti-AI movements are
turning violent. There've already been
multiple attempts on the lives of AI
leaders. Just last week, a data center
was set on fire.
Much of the American anti-AI sentiment
spreads to Europe. People are angry,
[music] and they want the EU to come
down harder on American tech companies.
They demand stronger social safety nets,
but most of the value of the AI boom
that could fund them is accruing to the
US.
Meanwhile, Europe's AI companies are
falling further behind. The gap between
Lumos and Prometheus is widened further.
American labs are now powered by swarms
of internal AI agents running most of
their own code.
They're making algorithmic progress at
more than twice their human-only speed.
Lumos has a fraction of the processing
power.
Every month the gap grows wider.
Europe's public efforts are delivering
public goods. The frontier AI initiative
has made impressive progress on
interpretability. That work benefits AI
reliability everywhere, but its world
model program has been hijacked. As soon
as the results started picking up,
Prometheus took notice. It spun up its
own team and it poached four of the
initiative's best [music] researchers in
exchange for astronomical compute
budgets.
The researchers wanted to stay. They
wanted to believe in the European
project, but at some point belief is not
enough.
The public can see that the EU's grant
strategy is failing. The investments
haven't let champions like Lumos catch
up. The regulatory actions under the DSA
haven't leveled the playing field.
To admit failure now would mean
admitting [music] it spent two years and
tens of billions of euros on a dead end.
So it doubles down.
The European Commission announces a new
fund, 20 billion euros for AI
sovereignty. It's clearly a long shot.
The same institutions that already
failed to turn money into capability are
being asked to try again with a harder
target in less time.
January 2029, dreams of a robot economy.
China's AI strategy isn't so different
from the EU's, except in one crucial
way. It's working.
Like Brussels, Beijing backs its most
promising companies. It protects the
industry with subsidies and procurement
mandates and it pushes hard for
adoption.
When China's compute was split between
rival labs, the Communist Party simply
ordered them to pool it.
>> [music]
>> The European Commission has no such
power. China's talent pool is deeper.
Its energy is cheap and abundant and its
frontier labs stay within a year of the
US.
And China doesn't believe its strategy
depends on leading the cognitive
frontier. The government always wanted
AI to boost the physical economy first.
And in robotics manufacturing it holds a
huge advantage. Massive state subsidies
have pushed humanoid production above a
million units a year.
In cities like Shenzhen, humanoids clean
the streets, quadrupeds deliver the
packages. It's ordinary now. Beijing's
bet is simple, stay close to Silicon
Valley and AI and let its industrial
advantage pay off as more robotics
capabilities arrive. The bet still looks
viable and in the US concern is
mounting. American politicians have
started calling the AI race with China
the second Cold War. Tensions rose
further when the US forced ASML to halt
exports to China. Since then both
Beijing and Washington have tightened
security around their AI development. In
the US, researchers are screened by the
NSA. They need clearance just to touch
frontier model weights and the
government regularly accuses China of
stealing algorithmic secrets.
China for its part has semi-nationalized
Phoenix and thrown its full weight
behind it.
April 2029, access all areas.
AI demand is soaring. [music] Compute
supply can't keep up. The labs start
rationing access to their frontier
models and raising prices. Businesses
are screaming for tokens.
American firms run 70% of the world's AI
compute and they sell it everywhere.
So, American infrastructure is making
foreign business more productive,
foreign military is more capable, and
foreign labs more competitive.
The American national security review
has been formalized. It no longer
pretends to be voluntary. Access to the
most capable models is throttled by
default. Domestic government agencies
get them first, allied governments next,
adversary nations not at all. But access
is one thing. The compute shortage means
inference itself is now at a premium.
And by April, Washington has had enough.
It starts rationing not just access, but
usage, [music]
even for the countries inside the tent.
It's called the Frontier Inference
Services Rule, a country-based licensing
regime. Tier 1 is for close allies, the
Five Eyes nations, plus Japan, South
Korea, Taiwan, and the Netherlands.
They get unrestricted access and
light-touch reporting. [music]
Tier 3 is for hostile countries, Iran,
Russia, China.
By default, they get nothing.
Most of Europe lands in tier two along
with about a hundred other countries in
between. And tier two has a cap. No more
than 25% of any provider's frontier
influence can go to tier two customers.
Europe depends on American AI. The US
has no such dependence on Europe. In
Brussels, an emergency European Council
meeting is convened. French and German
ministers fly to Washington to demand
tier one status.
They're told tier two better reflects,
quote, the current state of the
bilateral relationship.
May 2029, tilt. A week after the cap,
the phones in European capitals won't
stop ringing. Panicking businesses
trying to put off the inevitable.
The European companies smart enough to
delay or drop their sovereign AI
policies spent years building everything
around frontier agents.
Now those agents are being pulled out
from under them.
The European alternatives are almost two
years behind. The Chinese ones aren't
really an option for anyone with a
compliance department. Demand for Lumos'
models has shot far beyond what the
company can supply.
The gigafactories are finally under
construction. But they won't come online
until next year. And even then, they'll
be a fraction of what's needed to close
the gap. European leaders decide
something drastic has to be done.
For the first time ever, the Commission
opens a formal case under the
anti-coercion instrument.
But the assessment reaches an
uncomfortable conclusion. The obvious
retaliation is self-defeating. Tariffs
on US cloud and digital services would
just raise the price of the inference
European businesses are already
scrambling for. So, the proposed
countermeasures reach for subtler tools.
Suspending intellectual property
protections US labs hold inside the
single market. And screening or blocking
American takeovers of European firms.
It's an unattractive option. One that
invites a response Europe may not be
able to afford.
When it comes to a vote, it falls short
of the majority needed. On the record, a
senior Commission official says the
result reflects, quote, differing
national assessments of the strategic
environment. Off the record, a French
official puts it differently.
They were too scared of Washington to
fire the weapon they spent a decade
building.
February 2030, labor shock.
Europe's pretend work honeymoon doesn't
last. The one where people took up
gardening while the agents did their
jobs and their firms weren't allowed to
let them go.
European firms are stuck paying full
human staffs. They can't compete with
leaner American rivals. The shock hits
the most AI exposed industries first.
And the AI systems just keep getting
better. Continual learning was often
called the last hurdle to fully
automating knowledge work. Let
Prometheus latest model sit inside a
consultancy for 6 weeks
>> [music]
>> and it starts to write the way that firm
writes. It learns who to firms to who,
which clients take bad news badly, which
senior names are worth leading on. The
implementation is imperfect, but the
failures are rare and worth the price.
[music]
The jobs once thought safe, protected by
judgment or by knowledge too tacit to
write down, are now exposed.
The graduate jobs market is the worst in
living memory.
Street protests become routine. Some
demand labor protections. Some demand
bans on American AI. Some demand bans on
all AI. All of them demand that someone,
somewhere do something.
June 2030, an offer you can't refuse.
China is leading on robotics, but now
Prometheus is going all in on it, too.
It announces hundreds of billions in
spending on industrial data and on
manufacturing capacity to build robots
at something like China's scale. Its CEO
lays out the logic. America still leads
in AI software. With his new world model
team, he's cracked the last software
problem [music] standing in the way of
general purpose robots.
Soon robots will build the factories
that build the robots, just as the AIs
already write the code that improves
AIs. But there's catching up to do. A
new robot factory takes 2 years to build
in the US. In China, it takes 7 months.
Even America's rapid growth is now
constrained by infrastructure, by
inequality, and by public opinion.
So, the CEO decides the fast path isn't
to build, it's to buy. To retrofit
factories that already exist. Backed by
friendly investment funds, he go
shopping for industrial firms with floor
space. Space he can turn over to
building wheeled robots, quadrupeds, and
humanoids. Europe's car manufacturers
are high on the list. After years of
Chinese competition, Germany's biggest
car maker is close to bankruptcy. For a
buyer who wants high-tech manufacturing
to build tens of millions of robots a
year, it's perfect. But Berlin
disagrees. It blocks the sale on
national security grounds. But insiders
know it's really about pride. Prometheus
doesn't back down. The CEO calls the US
president. Within 72 hours, the White
House [music] hits European car imports
with sky-high tariffs.
Officially, it has nothing to do with
the car maker. 3 weeks later, a sale is
announced, dressed up as a partnership.
The German state takes a 20% stake. The
old board keeps a nominal control.
Behind the scenes, Prometheus is in
charge. It holds operational control,
the licensing rights to the
manufacturing platform, and first
refusal on any future fund raise. The
pattern repeats again and again over the
next few months. One by one, Europe's
high-tech manufacturers are bought up
and restructured by American ventures.
Robotics, aerospace, specialist tool
makers.
The official line is that it protects
jobs and keeps vital plants in European
soil. The reality is that Europe has no
counteroffer.
August 2030, model collapse.
The United States isn't trying to
destroy Europe. It's trying to beat
China in a race it believes is
existential. In Paris, the finance
minister presents a budget to the
National Assembly. Nobody in the room
believes it, including him.
Three numbers simply won't reconcile.
Welfare spending near pandemic levels,
corporate tax down 9%, and a tenth of
the whole budget going just to service
the debt.
The only way to make it add up is to
assume growth nobody believes in, and
everyone sees through it instantly. The
cost of French borrowing pulls sharply
away from Germany's,
>> [music]
>> to the widest gap since the euro was
created.
The political consequences soon arrive.
The protests build through the spring
until they turn violent. The screens in
the Bairamont show riots in Paris and
Rome. Young people mostly, united by
little except a sense that the system
has failed them.
Across the Atlantic, the picture is
different. [music]
Facing its own anti-AI backlash, the US
has rolled out job guarantees and direct
cash transfers at a scale Europe can't
even contemplate. [music]
The protests there haven't stopped, but
the government has bought itself time.
The contrast isn't lost on the European
public [music] or on European finance
ministers.
They know the American response is paid
for by AI-driven growth their own
economies can't produce.
The ECB [music] intervenes and
intervenes again. Then it runs out of
credible instruments. By late February,
depositors [music] in Italian and Greek
banks are moving money north faster than
the ECB can offset it.
March 2031, between giants.
By early 2031, power sits in two places.
American labs hold the cognitive
frontier. China still holds the physical
one.
Prometheus alone is worth more than
every listed European company combined.
>> [music]
>> The three biggest American AI firms each
spend more on compute than the entire EU
spends on defense.
The leading Chinese humanoid maker ships
more units in a month than Europe ships
in a year.
The rising tension across the Pacific
has brought Taiwan to the center of
everything.
TSMC's fabs, where the world's most
advanced AI chips are made, are mostly
on that island. The gap between US and
Chinese AI has grown over the past year.
Taiwan's importance has grown with it.
Both sides have tested AI-run weapons
platforms in public and more powerful
ones in private.
In Washington, the labs in the Defense
Department are so entangled, the
distinction barely means anything.
In Beijing, integration is more formal.
Analysts now use the word war with no
qualifier in front of it. Europe is in a
disastrous state. Polarization is
[music] everywhere. In the country hit
hardest by the AI shock, growth has
stopped. In the rest, it's all but
detached from how people actually live.
Mortgage defaults have surged in the
member states that rely on variable rate
loans.
But Europe has one last card to play.
After 5 years of failing to build a
frontier AI sector, it still owns the
one bottleneck the whole race runs
through. ASML is still the only company
on Earth that can build the EUV machines
used to print cutting-edge chips.
Without those machines, the US couldn't
[music] keep extending its lead. With
them, China would probably have caught
up long ago.
Beijing has made real progress on its
own DUV I machines. Mass production is
expected within a year, but it's too
little too late. A year now feels like a
lifetime.
The US is pushing ahead every day. The
Chinese government is deeply worried
that superintelligent AI is close, and
nobody is sure what it could do.
Some advisers fear the US could use the
advanced enough AI to neutralize China's
nuclear second strike. Others fear such
systems could be made persuasive enough
to destabilize the party itself. China's
lead in robotics is real, but it can't
ease those fears.
So, Beijing leans harder on the strategy
it's been running for 2 years. The loans
to Southern Europe grows bigger, and the
terms more generous.
The information campaigns intensify, and
European leaders start getting signals
about what a closer relationship might
look like.
Privileged market access, joint robotics
production, a seat at a table Washington
has mostly kept them away from.
For the first time, ASML and its EUV
technology are named explicitly.
5 years of being treated as a vassal by
Washington has left its mark. And in
several capitals, the alternative is,
for the first time, being taken
seriously.
The White House decides it needs direct
control of the company now, while it
still [music] can. The call goes to
three countries that can stop it. The
Netherlands, where ASML is based, and
Germany and France, because no Dutch
government could sign without them.
The US Vice President makes the offer in
a 40-minute call on a secure line.
ASML would be folded into a joint
Dutch-American holding company. A shared
board would run it, and Washington would
hold the controlling vote over what it
makes, who it sells to, and what
technology moves. In return, the US
offers is injection Europe can't match,
enough to build a string of new
production sites on American soil.
And more striking still, it promises
direct cash payments to European
citizens. The three leaders decide not
to tell their fellow EU heads of
government. They don't find the offer
acceptable, and they worry the others
would pressure them into taking it. When
they politely [music] decline, White
House makes the offer public and adds a
stick to the carrot. If the EU doesn't
sign, the whole region drops to tier
three and loses all access to American
AI, present and future. And the US knows
it holds all the cards. Several European
capitals reach out to China hoping for a
counter offer, something that gives them
room to say no to Washington.
It's not what they were hoping for.
Beijing has decided the charm offensive
isn't enough. It switches registers,
too.
If the Dutch sign with Washington, rare
earth export terms will be reviewed.
Robot export licenses will be
reassessed. And the deadline is shorter
than the American one.
Europe now has three options. Sign with
Washington, and Europe hands over its
only leverage. It becomes an American
protectorate in all but name. And if
China follows through [music] and cuts
off exports,
what's left of European manufacturing
dies.
Align with Beijing, and maybe the South
stops drowning. But it would also be
handing China the keys to its future.
Tier three would just be the opening
move.
Sign with neither, and Europe gets
nothing. Instead, it takes the full
displeasure of both great powers at
once. And it would likely tear the
already strained union apart.
Europe's slide into irrelevance was not
inevitable. Even as late as 2026, it
could have still have changed course if
it had found the courage and the will to
act drastically.
What you just watched is my version of
this story. It's compressed. I cut a
lot. The original goes much further.
It's told through characters, a young
policy worker in Brussels and a founder
who left Europe for Silicon Valley. And
it walks through all of this from the
inside year by year. There's dozens of
details, arguments, and turns I I
skipped past.
So, if any of this landed, if it worried
you [music] or annoyed you or made you
think, and if you want to think about
what are the right decisions, please go
ahead and read the full thing. The link
is in the description. Yeah, let me know
what you think.